There are numerous examples for applications of NVRAM. While earlier works often
considered NVRAM as a means to improve fault tolerance, recent research suggests
a broader range of applications. This development is especially driven by
recent advances in the manufacture of standalone NVRAM.

As pointed out earlier, a well-known use case of NVRAM is to increase fault
tolerance towards crashes. The goal is to retain main memory content even in
case of a crash, for instance by an abrupt power loss \cite{molina1992main,
eich1986main}. This way, critical data such as logs of file systems or databases
remain durable and can be used to recover and even complete unfinished
operations such as making a transaction durable \cite{liskov1991replication,
chen1996rio}. In the past, such solutions relied on battery-backed RAM. This was
subject to criticism as batteries only have a limited charge to ensure
durability. Also batteries degrade over time and need to be maintained to
prevent unexpected failure \cite{molina1992main}. Therefore, modern NVRAM
solutions which no longer require peripherals are a welcome improvement in this
area.

A significant amount of research on NVRAM is dedicated to mitigating the IO
bottleneck imposed by traditional disk storage. One way to do so is to defer
disk IO via durable disk caches \cite{chen1996rio, wu1994envy}. When an object
on disk is requested it is moved to the disk cache. Once an object is cached, it
may be read or modified without accessing the underlying disk. Write-back is
only required when there is not enough space for an incoming cache item. In
doing so, the number of data accesses involving disk IO can be greatly reduced.
Many operating systems including Linux or FreeBSD mimic this concept through the
use of page caches in volatile memory. The difference is that volatile caches
need to be flushed at some point which requires careful resource management.
NVRAM caches on the other hand, only need to evict items when there is no slot
for an incoming item.

Another approach is to treat NVRAM as an equivalent to traditional disk storage.
Early works, which were strongly influenced by the lack of high-capacity NVRAM,
proposed hybrid storage systems where disk storage was used in conjunction with
NVRAM \cite{wang2002conquest, miller2001hermes}. These works have very similar
assignment policies in that they only store small files such as metadata or
libraries in NVRAM whereas larger files remain on disk. While this does not
remove disk access as a common bottleneck, it certainly alleviates latency for
some frequently accessed files. In that regard, NVRAM-complemented disk storage
systems are similar to those with NVRAM disk caches.

For the time being, many applications will have to deal with a scarcity of
NVRAM. But as improving technologies achieve higher capacities with better
parameters, new system architectures become feasible. In some cases, traditional
storage may be eliminated altogether, making NVRAM the primary storage medium. A
prominent use case for this architecture are MMDB. These databases reside
entirely in main memory which drastically reduces latencies when accessing its
data. However, they are also vulnerable to crashes, as main memory is still
mostly volatile. In order to prevent data loss, MMDB have to mirror the entire
database to non-volatile memory. For that, they perform logging or checkpointing
to synchronize individual or groups of changes to non-volatile memory. When the
database is restarted, for example in response to a crash, checkpoints and
logging information are used to recover the most-recent state of the database
that was durable at the time of the crash. That is, MMDB require non-volatile
memory for the sole purpose of recovery. Recurring recovery measures such as
logging have been a long-standing issue with MMDB as they incur expensive disk
IO, thus limiting transaction throughput \cite{eich1986main, molina1992main,
wust2012efficient, malviya2014rethinking}. In addition, restarts reduce the
availability of a system as recovering large databases from slow storage can be
time-consuming. With NVRAM on the other hand, any MMDB would be implicitly
durable, hence making disk IO obsolete. Moreover, it has been shown that with
NVRAM logging is no longer necessary which paves the way for instantaneous
restarts \cite{oukid2015instant}. The concept of NVRAM-based MMDB is especially
promising as some upcoming variants of NVRAM are projected to feature larger
capacities than conventional DRAM \cite{lee2009architecting,
zilberberg2013phase, dulloor2014system}. For that reason, recent research has
investigated NVRAM-aware designs for MMDB ranging from KVS
\cite{bailey2013exploring, zhou2016nvht, wu2016nvmcached} to full-fledged
database systems \cite{oukid2015instant, schwalb2016hyrise, andrei2017sap}.
Research results in these areas are central to this work and are reflected in
chapter \ref{ch:nvram} through \ref{ch:concept}. Given their importance for this
thesis, existing KVS for NVRAM are looked into in more detail at the end of
chapter \ref{ch:kvs}.

While most works aim to improve existing architectures, some explore different
computation models. A recent example is a proposal to use NVRAM to enable
on-chip machine learning. The idea is to move away from the well-known Von
Neumann architecture and implement artificial neural networks by means of NVRAM
\cite{fumarola2016accelerating}. ANN perform a weighted sum over their inputs
before an activation function classifies the result. But before satisfiable
results can be obtained, ANN need to be trained by properly adjusting the scalar
weights of their inputs. It has been suggested that with NVRAM weight adjustment
could be performed on-chip where updated weights would be durable without the
need for write-back. However, neither artificial intelligence nor alternative
computation models are subject of this work.

Most proposals concerning NVRAM assume the presence of volatile RAM.
\cite{oukid2017data}. The reason behind this assumption is that not all parts of
memory may be intended for durability. Nonetheless, recent research suggests
that systems exclusively based on NVRAM can be built \cite{narayanan2012whole,
courtland2016can}. Clearly, such an architecture would have severe consequences
for both operating systems and applications \cite{bailey2011operating}. For
example, operating system processes would remain in memory even if terminated.
On the one hand, it could significantly accelerate the procedure of invoking a
process. On the other hand, all data belonging to a process' address space would
be durable even if they were corrupted by a crash. Other issues are concerned
about memory management, device drivers, and vital information. An early
prototype of such a system is currently in development \cite{courtland2016can}.
This topic however, is beyond the scope of this work and it is henceforth
assumed that volatile RAM will co-exist with NVRAM.

As shown above, NVRAM provides an opportunity to improve existing architectures
and even create new computation models. Given sufficient parameters such as
capacity and endurance, NVRAM could resolve the IO bottleneck of non-volatile
storage media. Especially systems such as MMDB have shown considerable gains in
transaction throughput and recovery times. Consequently, MMDB and in particular
KVS are at the center of this work.
